now the war in Gaza also continues to
have severe Ripple effects on
Palestinians living in the occupied West
Bank hundreds of thousands of people
there have lost their jobs in part after
Israel revoked Palestinian work permits
following the October the 7th Terror
attacks by Hamas now that's despite the
militant group being based in Gaza and
not in the West Bank the loss of their
jobs in Israel and the occupied
territories is plunging an increasing
number of West Bank residents into
poverty and this is cascading through
the Palestinian economy with dramatic
effects DW's Fanny fatcha reports now
from ramala and from the nearby Village
of Safa in the occupied West Bank
construction having mu samur says he
worked hard and was proud he could
provide for his family until recently we
were working in construction in uh
before October 7 and uh then everything
closed
he can see where he worked from his home
it's behind the security barrier in
Israel he always needed a permit to go
there but after last October's Hamas
Terror attacks Israel revoked that
permit for what they said was security
reasons tens of thousands of other
commuting Palestinians in the occupied
West Bank are in the same
situation we're being punished we're
being suffocated we're being besieged
we're under a lot of pressure this is
collective punishment for
Palestinians mujahid lives in Safa a
village near ramala many here had jobs
in Israel but without the permits to go
they are left relying on informal work
or
savings on top of that everything has
become more expensive inflation and
slower truck routes through Israeli
checkpoints since October 7th have been
driving prices
up we used to buy four or five different
kinds of fruit now we can barely afford
one
kind for many Palestinians it's become a
struggle to buy even the basics as the
effect of job losses trickles through
the economy the numbers are staggering
the World Bank estimated this may that
300,000 people here in the occupied West
Bank have lost their jobs that figure
includes those who commuted to work in
Israel and those whose work has dried up
right here because of the economic
crisis 1967 nasar Abdul Karim says the
decision to freeze Palestinian work
permits will further damage their
relationship with Israeli authorities I
think that will make backlash against
Israel and settlers in the West Bank
because poverty unemployment produces
Rob confrontation ation produces what we
call struggle against the power they
think that's responsible for their
suffering I don't believe mu's family
relies on the efforts of two of his sons
who still have worked in the West Bank
and his
wife there are many women who try to
help their husbands planting things to
sell but in general there aren't many
options we're left with no alternative
and we're left to deal with the
circumstances Israeli forces have
controlled movement of Palestinians in
the occupied West Bank with barriers
permits and checkpoints for decades now
it's all even Tighter and yet Israeli
companies need workers like mujahid they
have started hiring people from other
countries like India sparking fears the
poverty here could become
permanent and we can speak now to funny
FAA who produced that report for us
she's joining us now from ju Jerusalem
hi Fanny I'd like to pick up on that
last Point uh that you made in your
report the fact that Israeli companies
are now hiring overseas workers for jobs
that were once filled by
Palestinians this is presumably a new
development since October the 7th last
year I mean there' have been foreign
workers always before October 7th here
in Israel but that labor shortage is
just massive ever since that General ban
that policy by Israel is in place so
tens of thousands of jobs are vacant and
now what the government is trying to do
while businesses here in Israel are
really calling them to urgently come up
with some solution is to bring in
foreign workers for example from India
or Sri Lanka what they did is a few
months ago bringing in a few thousand
workers from India there's a close
relationship by the way between Israel
and India reportedly on subsidized
charter flights but that's just drop in
the bucket a lot of businesses here say
because workers are lacking in every
segment I'm not speaking only about
construction workers but also people in
tourism restaurants Services Etc and the
problem here is also the administrative
hurdle obviously to bring in foreign
workers it's not just about putting them
obviously on a plane and just come to
Israel it's about getting a work permit
it's about getting a Visa and all of
that of course slows down businesses in
fact a lot of businesses in Israel are
complaining and saying that already
they're on the brink of collapse because
of the financial problem that the lack
of Labor uh uh and uh uh is is creating
at the same time obviously ironically
those tens of thousands of jobs could be
easily filled by Palestinians workers if
there wasn't for this ban but that's not
the case Palestinians in the occupied
West Bank that I've been speaking to are
really struggling and suffering because
they can no longer access the jobs that
they had before October 7th and you're
saying that this is really plunging many
of them into real poverty I mean is
there is there anything that the
Palestinian Authority can do to help at
least cushion the uh the accumulative
effects of all of
this the general consensus looking at
the Palestinian Authority and the lack
of power really they administer about
40% roughly 40% of the occupied West
Bank 60% of it is controlled by Israel
while Israel since 1967 so that's nearly
six decades is occupying and controlling
the occupied West Bank militarily so
having said that of course a lot of
observers say there's not much the
Palestinian Authority can do however at
the same time not only economists but
also ordinary citizens there in ramala
on the streets of ramala I've been
speaking to say wait a moment the
Palestinian Authority could at least try
to fairly distribute whatever resources
they have that also means that they
would need to crack down on corruption
to become more effective so obviously
they both sides to the story but
ultimately and I think this is very very
important to mention the longer the war
in Gaza continues
the more likely it is and higher the
risk that this economic crisis that the
occupied West Bank is in could turn into
an economic collapse DW senior
International correspondent funny Fatar
reporting from Jerusalem funny thank you
so much